ZENO OF ELEA SECTION

source 1

The quantum Zeno effect gets its name from the Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea. Zeno lived in the 5th century B. C. in the Greek colony of Elea (now in southern Italy). Zeno was known to be the most brilliant disciple of Parmenides, a very prominent figure of the Eleatic School of philosophers. Aristotle is supposed to have credited Zeno with having invented the method of the “dialectic”, where two speakers alternately attack and defend a thesis. Zeno is also credited with inventing the argument form ’reductio ad absurdum’. However, Zeno is most famous for his four paradoxes of motion which he developed as arguments against the then existing notions of space and time. A description of the quantum Zeno effect does not necessarily require a prior knowledge of the classical paradoxes of Zeno. However, as an interesting historical reference, we will briefly describe particular versions of the four classical paradoxes before embarking on a description of the quantum Zeno effect itself. The four classical paradoxes of Zeno popularly go by the names: Achilles and the tortoise, (ii) The arrow, (iii) the dichotomy, and (iv) the sophisticated stadium. In the following, we will briefly describe them, one by one.

Achilles has to race a tortoise. Since Achilles is obviously faster than his opponent, the tortoise is given a head start. Let us suppose that the race begins at t=0, when Achilles is located at x = 0, and the tortoise, with its head start stands at x = x0 [see Fig.1(a)]. Zeno argued that the running Achilles could never catch up with the tortoise because he must first reach where the tortoise started. For instance, when Achilles reaches x0 at time t0 , the tortoise has already progressed to x1 (> x0 ). By the time Achilles reaches x1 , at time t1 , the tortoise has crawled up to x2 . Thus, whenever Achilles reaches xi , the tortoise would have moved to xi+1 , and Achilles would need time ti+1 − ti before he gets to that point (by which time the tortoise would have moved on ahead!). Zeno argues that for Achilles to reach the tortoise (or to overtake it), he must perform an infinite sum of such time increments, ti+1 − ti , or spatial increments, xi+1 − xi for all i upto ∞. If space and time are considered to be continuous, these increments would tend to zero duration, and if they are considered discrete, the increment would be of finite duration. (Note that in the continuous case, the increments tend to zero but will not be actually zero for any finite i). Zeno argues that if space and time are continuous, an infinite sum of elements tending towards zero length (duration) must have a total of zero length (duration). Alternatively, if space and time are discrete, then an infinite sum of finite elements must be of infinite length (duration). Since Achilles is “seen” to overtake the tortoise, the above arguments fail. Thus, the seemingly absurd conclusion that follows is that both space and time can neither be continuous nor discrete. This compels us to consider the notion that space and time are illusory- hence, so is everything we see!

Imagine an arrow flying through space. Time is considered to be made up of ”instants”. These instants are defined as the smallest measure and they are indivisible. At any instant of time, when the arrow is observed, it must be seen to occupy a space equal to itself. If it is “seen” to “move” at any instant, it means that the observer can divide an instant into a time when the arrow was “here” and a time when the arrow was “there”. This would mean that the instant of time consists of parts, which violates its basic definition (that of it being indivisible). Thus, Zeno asserts that there are no instants of time when the arrow does move. This, again, leads to the conclusion that the arrow is always at rest and that all motion is illusory.

Imagine that Achilles wants to run from point A to point B. Before he can cover half the distance to the end, he must cover the first quarter. Before this, he must cover the first eighth, and before that the first sixteenth, and so on. Before Achilles can cover any distance at all he must cover an infinite number of smaller spatial separations. Zeno argued that covering these infinite numbers of small spatial separations in a finite time would be impossible. Thus, it can be concluded that Achilles can never get started. But Achilles is “seen” to move. Thus, once again, the argument compels us to conclude that all motion is an illusion.This paradoxical argument is called the Dichotomy because it involves repeatedly splitting a distance into two parts. It contains some of the same elements as the Achilles and the Tortoise paradox, but with a more apparent conclusion of motionlessness. This is the last of Zeno’s four paradoxes. 

Let us suppose that space and time are discrete in nature and that motion consists in occupying different spatial points at different times. For simplicity, consider objects moving at a minimal speed, v, of one fundamental spatial distance per fundamental temporal duration. Consider nine persons moving roughly collinearly [See Fig 1(d)]. Persons ai are all stationary, while persons bi move past them to the left, with the velocity, −v. At the same time, persons ci move to the right past the ai s with velocity v. Say, at time t = 0 the configuration is as shown in Fig.1(d (i)). One fundamental unit of time later, the configuration in Fig 1(d(ii)) is achieved. One can see that c3 has passed by b2 , but there was never an instance when c3 was lined up with b2 . Thus, it can be argued that there is no time at which the actual passing occurs, and hence, it never happened! Another way to bring attention to this paradoxical situation is to note that in Fig. 1 d(ii), each B has passed twice as many Cs as As. Thus, one might conclude that it takes row B twice as long to pass row A as it does to pass row C. However, the time for rows B and C to reach the position of row A is the same. So, it appears that half the time is equal to twice the time!

The four paradoxes, summarized above in their barest forms, foxed and confused mathematicians and philosophers for over two millenia. It was only after the development of the calculus of infinitesimals by Leibniz and Newton, the concept of functions, limits, continuity, infinite series, and convergence, that a satisfactory resolution to Zeno’s paradoxes came about. However, even today, inspite of our familiarity with these modern mathematical ideas and concepts, there is a continuing debate about 2the validity of Zeno’s paradoxes and their various resolutions.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

source 2

Zeno was a sophist philosopher, and a native of Elea, in Southern Italy. The quantum Zeno effect is named after him. In this article we will discuss the physical and mathematical aspects of this phenomenon and its dynamical features. 

Zeno put forward some famous paradoxical arguments against motion. We shall focus on one of these, according to which a sped arrow does not move, and analyze under which conditions an evolving quantum state may not move. We will start by framing Zeno’s arguments and their quantum mechanical counterparts in the proper philosophical, historical, cultural and physical context. This is a technical article, that will be (hopefully) read by physicists and mathematicians, yet we deem it appropriate to start from a genuine humanistic perspective.

Zeno was born about 488 BC in Elea, a small town not far from Naples, in the Mediterranean region called “Magna Graecia”. He was a prominent figure of the Eleatic school of philosophy, founded by Parmenides, of whom he was the favorite disciple. They believed that senses are deceptive and motion and change mere illusions: there is only one Truth (“being”) that is static, does not change and cannot be decomposed into parts or smaller entities. It is therefore indivisible and does not develop. This view contrasted with the notion of reality of Pythagoras and Heraclitus, who believed in a world of change and “becoming” and started revealing the power of thought and mathematics, on which modern science stands.

Zeno’s arguments were subtle and profound and aimed at bringing to light some paradoxical aspects of common sense and of the notion of a reality in continuous change. Some of these arguments directly deal with motion and one in particular will concern us here: a flying arrow is at rest. Indeed, at any given moment the arrow is in a portion of space equal to its own length, and therefore is at rest at that moment. Therefore, at every instant the arrow is motionless in a given position and the “sum” of these positions of rest is not a motion. Notice that, according to the original sources, no direct mention is made to the act of observation. Yet, implicitly, Zeno argued against our sensorial (and therefore deceptive) perception of movement.

Parmenides and Zeno went to Athens to discuss their ideas with Plato and Aristotle. We learn from Plato that at the time of that trip Zeno was about 40 years old, Parmenides about 65 and the pupil put all his energy in defending the view of his master. However, the two Eleatics were defeated (those were times when solidity of argumentation made a difference in philosophical and political discussions). Although many ancient writers refer to Zeno’s ideas, none of his writings survives, so that most of what we know of him comes from what Aristotle wrote. This is like learning about a manuscript by reading a (negative) referee report, although an authoritative one.

Plato calls Zeno the inventor of dialectic: his arguments foreran the seemingly paradoxical method of proof that is known nowadays as reductio ad absurdum. It is therefore not surprising that Zeno is considered a precursor of sophism. The implication of the word sophist has changed greatly over time, running from its original meaning. Initially, it was a highly complimentary term, referred to someone who conveyed knowledge and wisdom (“sophia”) to his disciples. Eventually, by the time of Plato and Aristotle, the word had taken on negative connotations, usually referring to someone who used the arts of debate and rhetoric in order to deceive, or to support fallacious reasoning. In some modern Indo-European languages, words that have the same root as “sophisticator” have acquired a very negative meaning. In the Webster’s dictionary one finds that “echoes of Sophism survive today in the language theory of Jacques Derrida and other postmodern rhetoricians who teach that language ought to be deconstructed in order to unpack the intentions of “sophisticated” communicators.” Contemporary physics has sometimes, righteously, a difficult relationship with postmodern philosophy. 

Yet this inherited negative attitude does not render justice to Zeno, whose paradoxes have inspired philosophers for over two millennia, challenged mathematicians for a few hundred years, and puzzled physicists for the last 30 years. Many great thinkers looked for a way out of the paradoxes. Kant, Hume, Hegel and many others proposed solutions to Zeno’s paradoxes, pondering over the meaning of space, time and our forms of perception. Although these solutions were ultimately not accepted by modern mathematics and science, they helped shaping our modern concepts and rigorous definitions: our ideas of space, time, motion, infinite, infinitesimal, line, point, derivative and measure would not be the same without Zeno’s input. After two thousand years of continual refutation, his arguments made the foundation of modern mathematics. Rigorous definitions are unavoidable if one wants to rely on a logically consistent mathematical scheme and does not want to fall into contradictions.

It is probably fairly accurate to say that Zeno’s problems stem from human efforts to comprehend the infinite. Nowadays it is common to hear, in mathematics and physics circles, that Zeno’s arguments are based on false assumptions and that no Zeno-like paradoxes are present within modern mathematics. We venture to disagree, not on the conclusions, but on the premises: modern mathematics was created in order to avoid those questions that Zeno posed, in exactly the same way as modern set theory carefully avoids the use of Russell’s set of sets. Sped arrows move, runners catch tortoises, one can pass an infinite number of points in a finite time and our concepts of infinitesimal, finite and infinite have been adapted to our need to arrive at a consistent description of motion [156]. Clearly, no subsequent logically consistent system could afford to ignore Zeno’s paradoxes, but of course it would have been impracticable to accept passively a doctrine like that of Elea. When we describe the motion of a ball in terms of Newton’s law or the evolution of a wave function in terms of Schrödinger’s equation, we stand on the shoulders of thinkers who solved seemingly irreconcilable contradictions. 
